---
layout: post
title: 'Bind Mounts in Linux'
date: 2015-12-31
permalink: /posts/2015/12/bind-mounts/
tags:
  - Bind Mounts
  - Linux
---

Bind mounts in Linux allow you to mount one part of the file hierarchy somewhere else. I highly recommend using bind mounts in [chrooted](http://www.necrux.com/posts/2015/12/ftp/) environment as it can simplify user access control.

Creating Bind Mounts
===

Bind mounts were added in kernel 2.4.0, so older systems will not support it. Run `uname -r` to verify your kernel version. As long as bind mounts are supported on your system, you can use the following examples to set one up.

Adding a Read/Write Bind Mount
---

```
mount --bind /olddir /newdir
```

Make it Persistent
---

```
cat >> /etc/fstab << EOF
/olddir /newdir none bind
EOF
```

Adding a Read-Only Bind Mount
---

```
mount --bind /olddir /newdir
mount -o remount,ro,bind /newdir
```

Make it Persistent
---

```
cat >> /etc/fstab << EOF
/olddir /newdir none bind
/newdir /newdir none remount,ro,bind
EOF
```

**Note:** A lot of people like to make mounts persistent by running `tail -n1 /etc/mtab >> /etc/fstab`, however this method may not always format bind mounts properly in `/etc/fstab`!

Bind Mounts in chrooted Environments
===

Using the above techniques allow you to easily grant and revoke access for different websites to chrooted FTP/SFTP user(s). To accomplish this you would need to have a group dedicated to your chrooted users, change your websites’ group owner, and expand the website group permissions where necessary.

To illustrate this lets configure a test environment. Read this if you need to configure the chroot portion.

This will be our chrooted group:

```
groupadd sftponly
```

This will be our chrooted user:

```
useradd -s /bin/false -G sftponly -d /home/bob bob
```

And here are our 3 websites:

```
mkdir -p /var/www/vhosts/WEBSITE{1,2,3}
```

We will set the group ownership of the websites to sftponly so that chrooted users, when granted access, can work with the files:

```
chown -R :sftponly /var/www/vhosts/WEBSITE{1,2,3}
```

We should also set the Set Group ID (SGID) on the website directories so that any newly created content will have the proper group ownership:

```
find /var/www/vhosts/WEBSITE{1,2,3} -type d -exec chmod g+s {} \;
```

With our environment configured, we can grant bob access to any of the sites by creating a subdirectory in `/home/bob` and bind mounting the website directory to it.

```
mkdir /home/bob/WEBSITE1
mount --bind /var/www/vhosts/WEBSITE1 /home/bob/WEBSITE1
```

And to revoke access:

```
umount /home/bob/WEBSITE1
```

It’s that easy!

Troubleshooting
===

If you are receiving "Permission denied" errors, be sure to verify the permissions of "other" on `/home/bob/` and the permissions of "group" on `/var/www/vhosts/WEBSITE{1,2,3}`.
