---
title: 'SMTP Sender-Dependent SASL Authentication in Postfix'
date: 2016-01-18
permalink: /posts/2016/1/sender-dependent-sasl-auth/
tags:
  - email
  - mail
  - Linux
  - Mailgun
  - Postfix
---

In a [previous article](http://www.necrux.com/posts/2015/12/getting-started-with-mailgun/) I discussed how to use Mailgun as a relay in Postfix. This works great if you are only sending email from one website on your server, often times however you will have multiple websites sending email on a single server. In these cases, websites NOT belonging to the sender domain will say sent via SENDER_DOMAIN: `wes@example.com via necrux.com`

To avoid this situation you can configure Postfix for sender-dependent authentication so that emails are properly relayed through their respective domain. In my examples we will be using Mailgun, however you can use any relay of your choosing; you can even use different relays for different domains!

Configure Postfix Manually
===

To configure Postfix you will need the following set-up in `/etc/postfix/main.cf`:

```
smtp_sasl_auth_enable = yes
smtp_sasl_security_options = noanonymous
smtp_sender_dependent_authentication = yes
smtp_sasl_password_maps = hash:/etc/postfix/sasl_passwd
sender_dependent_relayhost_maps = hash:/etc/postfix/sender_relay
```

The above settings specify a separate file to declare the relay hosts, however if you are only using one relay (e.g. Mailgun), you can replace that setting with the standard relayhost parameter:

```
relayhost = [smtp.mailgun.org]:587
```

Configure Postfix with postconf
===

Alternatively you may want to configure `/etc/postfix/main.cf` with the `postconf` command. Using `postconf` offers a couple of advantages:

1. It warns about possible mis-typed parameter names.
2. It avoids accidentally creating duplicate entries.

To configure the `main.cf` with `postconf` run the following:

```
postconf -e "smtp_sasl_auth_enable = yes"
postconf -e "smtp_sasl_security_options = noanonymous"
postconf -e "smtp_sender_dependent_authentication = yes"
postconf -e "smtp_sasl_password_maps = hash:/etc/postfix/sasl_passwd"
```

**Single relayhost**

```
postconf -e "relayhost = [smtp.mailgun.org]:587"
postconf -# sender_dependent_relayhost_maps
```

**Multiple relayhosts**

```
postconf -e "sender_dependent_relayhost_maps = hash:/etc/postfix/sender_relay"
postconf -# relayhost
```

Configure the Password Maps File
===

The `smtp_sasl_password_maps` file contains a mapping of all domains to the appropriate SMTP credentials. The syntax must be as follows:

```
@<domain> <smtp_user>@<domain>:<smtp_password>
@<domain> <smtp_user>@<domain>:<smtp_password>
```

Example:

```
@necrux.com postmaster@necrux.com:password
```

**Note:** The @domain parameter *can* contain regex.

Next you must run `postmap` against `/etc/postfix/sasl_passwd` to create a Postfix lookup table:

```
postmap /etc/postfix/sasl_passwd
```

Configure the Relayhost Maps File
===

The `/etc/postfix/sender_relay` file contains a mapping of all domains to the appropriate relay. This option is not necessary if you are using a single relay. The syntax must be as follows:

```
@<domain> <relay>
@<domain> <relay>
```

Example:

```
@necrux.com [smtp.mailgun.org]:587
```

**Note:** The @domain parameter *can* contain regex.

As with `smtp_sasl_password_maps`, you must run `postmap` against `/etc/postfix/sasl_passwd` to create a Postfix lookup table:

```
postmap /etc/postfix/sender_relay
```

Configuring a Catchall Domain
===

There are times when you may deem it necessary to configure a catchall domain so that any sender domain **NOT** explicitly defined can still relay email. To do this you will need to define the relayhost parameter in `/etc/postfix/main.cf` and configure a catchall relay in `/etc/postfix/sasl_passwd`.

```
postconf -e "relayhost = [smtp.mailgun.org]:587"
echo "[smtp.mailgun.org]:587 <smtp_user>@<domain>:<smtp_password>" >> /etc/postfix/sasl_passwd
postmap /etc/postfix/sasl_passwd
```

Where <smtp_user> and <smtp_password> are the credentials for the catchall <domain>.

Testing the Solution
===

The quickest way to test the solution is to send a couple of emails from the command line using the `mail` command.

```
echo "Here is my relay test email." |\
mail -s "Mailgun Relay" -r <sender>@<sender_domain> <recipient>@<recipient_domain>
```

If the emails are not being sent/received, first check the local log at `/var/log/maillog` to see if the message was sent. If it left the server but never arrived at the destination, refer to the logs at Mailgun. Otherwise double-check your configuration settings and make certain that you restarted Postfix!

Automating the Solution
===

Configuring Postfix can be tedious work, especially if you are dealing with multiple domains. I have a [bash script](https://github.com/necrux/scripts/blob/master/mailgun_sender_dependent_authentication.sh) on GitHub that will automate this process, all you need is your [Mailgun API key](https://help.mailgun.com/hc/en-us/articles/203380100-Where-can-I-find-my-API-key-and-SMTP-credentials-).
